---
layout: post
title: "Revisited: Using .NET DLLs in legacy applications per COM"
---

Recently I had to work myself through making .NET code available to legacy COM applications.
At my company we have rewritten some Microsoft FoxPro applications to .NET and WPF.
To provide the customers a pleasant migration, we need to expose some of the newly developed functionality to the old FoxPro applications.
At the moment existing .NET code is already used in FoxPro, so I didn't have to start at zero - but problems usually show up in the details.
So this is a reminder for me (and maybe helpful for you, too) to avoid some obstacles when working with .NET through COM.

## Getting started

Microsoft published a good guide on this topic on 
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/828736/how-to-call-a-managed-dll-from-native-visual-c-code-in-visual-studio-n>

## .NET Standard

Depending on the chosen runtime, you can even use .NET Standard libraries and make them COM Visible. 
See the following links for more details

* <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44861236/make-a-net-standard-library-com-visible>
* <https://github.com/kyourek/ComVisibleNetStandard>

## Resolution of dependant DLLs and GAC usage
When you register a COM DLL, you usually put it in a shared directory and not in the same directory as your application. 
This can cause problems with the DLL's dependencies, as they are not found by the CLR by default.

An idea that may come to your mind is to put all the DLLs and their dependencies into the GAC. 
But wait - unless you absolutely know what you're doing, I would recommend not using the GAC for that. 
All kinds of strange things may happen, especially on a development machine. 
I found myself in the situation developing an application and wondering why my just made code changes didn't reflect in the application's behaviour.
That was because the old DLL was still in the GAC and was used by the application.
This experience helped me learn a thing or two about the way GAC works.
But you usually don't want to have that pain of learning for every developer working on your application.

I would rather recommand another way: 
You can use the `AppDomain.AssemblyResolve` event 
([see MSDN for details](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.appdomain.assemblyresolve?redirectedfrom=MSDN&view=netframework-4.7.2)).
This event is called by the runtime when the resolution of an assembly fails. 
Practically speaking, I would recommend the following:

* Create a class and method in your COM visible DLL. Call that method in your COM application one time at startup before it uses any other of your COM visible .NET code.
* In that method, register your own handler to the `AppDomain.AssemblyResolve` event.
* In your own event handler, determine the current .NET assembly's location and look for the needed DLL. Keep in mind, that it might also be a ressources DLL.

In the end your code could look like this:

```C#
public void Init()
{
    AppDomain.CurrentDomain.AssemblyResolve += (sender, e) =>
    {
        try
        {
            var assemblyLocation = Assembly.GetExecutingAssembly().Location;

            if (File.Exists(assemblyLocation))
            {
                assemblyLocation = Path.GetDirectoryName(assemblyLocation);
            }

            var assemblyDllName = e.Name.Substring(0, e.Name.IndexOf(",")) + ".dll";
            var fullFilename = Path.Combine(assemblyLocation, assemblyDllName);
            var fileExists = File.Exists(fullFilename);

            if (fileExists)
            {
                return Assembly.LoadFrom(fullFilename);
            }

            if (assemblyDllName.Contains(".resources.dll"))
            {
                fullFilename = Path.Combine(assemblyLocation, Thread.CurrentThread.CurrentCulture.TwoLetterISOLanguageName, assemblyDllName);
                fileExists = File.Exists(fullFilename);

                if (fileExists)
                {
                    return Assembly.LoadFrom(fullFilename);
                }
            }

            return null;
        }
        catch (Exception ex)
        {
            return null;
        }
    };
}
```

## Registering COM DLLs

Visual Studio provides the option "Register for COM interop" on the "Build" tab of your project.
But remember that this is only useful for development work on your local machine.
On any machine you want to deploy your software to you need to register the COM visible DLL yourself.
But how to do this?
Open your Visual Studio command prompt as administrator and follow these steps:

* Create a TLB file for your COM visible DLL: `tlbexp MyLibrary.dll`
* Register your DLL for 32-bit: `"C:\Windows\Microsoft.NET\Framework\v4.0.30319\RegAsm.exe" /tlb:MyLibrary.tlb /codebase MyLibrary.dll`
* Register your DLL for 64-bit: `"C:\Windows\Microsoft.NET\Framework64\v4.0.30319\RegAsm.exe" /tlb:MyLibrary.tlb /codebase MyLibrary.dll`

Notes:

* regsvr32 is the "classical" way to register COM objects, regasm is only used for .NET DLLs.
* To unregister your DLL just use the `/unregister` flag on the previously used commands: `\RegAsm.exe /unregister /tlb:MyLibrary.tlb /codebase MyLibrary.dll`

## Testing COM DLLs with C++

To test your COM visible DLLs, you can create a sample project in C++ (NOT C++/CLI, which is based on the .NET framework).

You can import the typed interfaces from the DLL by using the following import statement:

```C++
#import "path\\to\\MyLibrary.tlb" raw_interfaces_only rename_namespace("MyLibrary")
```

The `rename_namespace("MyLibrary")` option makes all of the exports available in the `MyLibrary` namespace in C++, which makes it easy to separate them from your other C++ code.

With this set up, you can use your libary in the code like this:

```C++
try {
    ::CoInitialize(NULL); // make sure to call CoInitialize one time before starting to use your COM DLL
    MyLibrary::MyInterfacePtr obj(__uuidof(MyLibrary::MyClass));
    obj->MyMethod();
}
catch (_com_error e) {
    printf("Error: %S\n", e.Description());
    printf("Error: %S\n", e.ErrorMessage());
}
```

This code instantiates an object of the class `MyClass`, that implements the interface `MyInterface`, and calls the method `MyMethod` on it.

## COM visibility

The example provided by Microsoft sets `[assembly: ComVisible(true)]` in the `AssemblyInfo.cs` file.
This makes every interface and class in your project visible to COM.
To do so is fine if you use your project as a facade to your existing functionality and the project only contains your facade types.
But for a more fine-grained control over COM visibility I would recommend setting `ComVisible` to false on the assembly level and using `ComVisible` attributes per class or interface.
